[blog] Blog post with MUI X v7.0.0 annoucement (#41563)
mui/material-ui: docs/pages/blog/mui-x-v7.md

---
title: Introducing MUI X v7.0.0

> description: Check out what's new in the new major version of the advanced components.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: Check out all the newest additions to the next major of the advanced components.
```

So we don't repeat "new" twice

date: 2024-03-25T08:00:00.000Z
authors: ['josefreitas']

> tags: ['MUI X', 'Product', 'News']

Reviewer: ```suggestion
tags: ['MUI X', 'Product',]
```

We don't have the News tag anymore!

card: true
---

<div style="max-width: 692px; width: 100%; height: 230px; overflow: hidden; margin-bottom: 16px;">
  <a href="https://github.com/mui/mui-x/releases/tag/v7.0.0">

>     <img src="/static/blog/mui-x-v7/intro.jpg" alt="MUI X v7 - major stable release" width="1200" height="400" style="width: 100%; height: 100%; object-fit: cover; object-position: center;" />

Reviewer: Yeah, I think we should use the same formatting/styles as the beta post:

<img width="500" alt="Screenshot 2024-03-20 at 09 29 16" src="https://github.com/mui/material-ui/assets/67129314/a2e6c84b-251c-4e73-8108-60dc3e080c54">

  </a>
</div>

> After a few months in pre-release, we're thrilled to announce the first stable release of [MUI X v7](https://github.com/mui/mui-x/releases/tag/v7.0.0), packed with new components, exciting features, improved usability and developer experience.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After a few months in pre-release, we're thrilled to announce the stable release of [MUI X v7](https://github.com/mui/mui-x/releases/tag/v7.0.0), packed with new components, exciting features, improved usability, and developer experience.
```

Would we have a _second_ stable release? I guess everything post-stable is stable, right? Maybe we can ditch that

- [What's next](#whats-next)
- [Long-term support](#long-term-support)
- [Migration guide](#migration-guide)
- [How to get involved](#how-to-get-involved)

## Data Grid

### Column resizing on community plan

As our commercial offerings expand, we're pleased to also enhance our community plan by integrating features previously exclusive to commercial users.

[Column resizing](https://next.mui.com/x/react-data-grid/column-dimensions/#resizing) and [auto-sizing](https://mui.com/x/react-data-grid/column-dimensions/#autosizing), which were once Pro features, are now available to all users at no cost.
This transition reflects our commitment to providing an exceptional user experience across the board, and aims to make the free components stand out more in the open-source space.

### Sticky headers

The Data Grid now offers a more responsive experience with smoother scrolling and enhanced screen reader support, thanks to a refactor of column headers and pinning implementations.

On its first announcement, we showcased some of these improvements, but during the beta phase, we have further polished the scrolling performance for an even more significantly improved user experience.

> <video preload="metadata" autoplay muted loop playsinline width="690" height="417" controls>

Reviewer 2: The only thing I see (and it might be nitpicking) is that it might be better to have 2 videos, one for before and one for after instead of one that alters between the 2 states. My argument is that it's simpler to grasp and see the difference more clearly.

>   <source src="/static/blog/mui-x-v7/sticky-headers.mp4" type="video/mp4">

Reviewer 2: The only thing I see (and it might be nitpicking) is that it might be better to have 2 videos, one for before and one for after instead of one that alters between the 2 states. My argument is that it's simpler to grasp and see the difference more clearly.

Author: I experimented with that in different constellations (now that we also have a before/after vertical scrolling), but the page got too noisy with two unsynced but related videos running at the same time, so I left a single video because I believe the page feels much cleaner with it.

</video>

:::warning

> The scrolling experience is far better, but the solution is limited: **column headers can no longer be transparent** because content scrolls behind them.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The scrolling experience is far better, but the solution has a downside: **column headers can no longer be transparent** because content scrolls behind them.
```

The "solution is limited" sounded too harsh, what do you think? 🙂

> If you're using our theming system, the Data Grid will adapt to your application seamlessly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you're using the theming system, the Data Grid will adapt to your application seamlessly.
```

Or it should probably say, for further accuracy:

```suggestion
If you're using Material UI's theming system, the Data Grid will adapt to your application seamlessly.
```

> Without the theming system, you may need to manually set an appropriate background color to maintain your design.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Without it, you may need to manually set an appropriate background color to maintain your design.
```

No need to repeat "theming system" if it's referred to in the last sentence

:::

### Improved columns panel design

As part of an overarching project aimed at enhancing usability in managing columns within the Data Grid, we've redesigned the column visibility panel, introducing a more streamlined, checkbox-based interface to replace the previous toggle switch design.

Our goal is to further develop this panel by incorporating additional column management functions, such as column reordering and pinning. Additionally, We've extracted the internal component to facilitate the introduction of the upcoming pivoting UI.

<img width="310" alt="new column management panel design" src="/static/blog/mui-x-v7/column-management-panel.png">

### Date Object support in filter model

The `filterModel` now supports `Date` objects for `date` and `dateTime` column types, providing a more intuitive and efficient filtering experience.

While string values remain compatible for these types, any updates to the `filterModel` made through the UI (such as via the filter panel) will automatically use `Date` objects, ensuring consistency and ease of data handling.

### Smaller bundle size

> Introducing a separate entry point for locales has significantly reduced the bundle size of the barrel index when tree-shaking isn't operational (e.g., Webpack in dev mode).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Introducing a separate entry point for locales has significantly reduced the bundle size of the barrel index when tree-shaking isn't operational (for example Webpack in dev mode).
```

For example, with the `@mui/x-data-grid` npm package, this change led to a reduction of approximately 19% – shrinking the bundle size from [114.2kB](https://bundlephobia.com/package/@mui/x-data-grid@6.19.2) to [92.9kB](https://bundlephobia.com/package/@mui/x-data-grid@7.0.0).

> <img width="694" alt="Bundle size change" src="/static/blog/mui-x-v7/new-bundle-size.png" style="padding-left: 20px; padding-right: 5px;">

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<img width="694" alt="A chart demonstrating how MUI X v7 has a significantly reduced bundle size" src="/static/blog/mui-x-v7/new-bundle-size.png" style="padding-left: 20px; padding-right: 5px;">
```

We can beef up these alt texts a bit — they're not very descriptive

- [Column groups](https://mui.com/x/react-data-grid/column-groups/)
- [Lazy loading](https://mui.com/x/react-data-grid/row-updates/#lazy-loading) [<span class="plan-pro"></span>](/x/introduction/licensing/#pro-plan 'Pro plan')
- [Header filters](https://mui.com/x/react-data-grid/filtering/header-filters/) [<span class="plan-pro"></span>](/x/introduction/licensing/#pro-plan 'Pro plan')
- [Cell selection](https://mui.com/x/react-data-grid/cell-selection/) [<span class="plan-premium"></span>](/x/introduction/licensing/#premium-plan 'Premium plan')
- [Clipboard paste](https://mui.com/x/react-data-grid/clipboard/#clipboard-paste) [<span class="plan-premium"></span>](/x/introduction/licensing/#premium-plan 'Premium plan')

## Tree View

Since the promotion from the lab's package to MUI X, the primary focus has been on improving the component's developer experience.
This includes efforts aimed to simplify its usage, implement new customization APIs, and provide clearer documentation and illustrative examples, making them more informative and user-friendly.

A significant addition is the time-saving alternative to the traditional JSX architecture, the RichTreeView.

> ### RichTreeView

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Rich Tree View
```

We've split the Tree View into two distinct components.

> The first is the `SimpleTreeView`, which retains the classic and familiar JSX approach and is still the one behind the original `<TreeView />` tag.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The first is the Simple Tree View, which retains the classic and familiar JSX approach and is still the one behind the original `<TreeView />` tag.
```

As per the styling guide, or:

```suggestion
The first is the `<SimpleTreeView/>`, which retains the classic and familiar JSX approach and is still the one behind the original `<TreeView />` tag.
```

The second is the `RichTreeView`, a new variant designed to streamline the development process, and with which we aim to support several common use cases out-of-the-box.

> Similar to the Data Grid, it requires only a dataset and possibly a few properties to render; it does all the heavy lifting for you, handling most of the complexities internally.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Similar to the Data Grid, it only requires a dataset and possibly a few properties to render; it does all the heavy lifting for you, handling most of the complexities internally.
```

https://english.stackexchange.com/questions/173239/only-requires-or-requires-only

> In the above example, if you wish to emphasize being merely $1, when you would place only as near as possible to $1 and in a prominent position - costs only $1.
>
> There may be times when you would be in the mood of emphasizing that costing $1 is the only consideration you have in mind, and you would choose to say only costs $1.

I think we are closer from the 2nd example here

```jsx
const myDataSet = [
  {
    id: 'node-1',
    label: 'Node 1',
    children: [
      { id: 'node-1-1', label: 'Node 1.1' },
      { id: 'node-1-2', label: 'Node 1.2' },
    ],
  },
  {
    id: 'node-2',
    label: 'Node 2',
  },
];
```

```jsx
<RichTreeView items={myDataSet} multiSelect />
```

Check out the [new component](https://mui.com/x/react-tree-view/rich-tree-view/items/)!

### New customization hook: `useTreeItem2`

We're introducing a new API to customize Tree items through a hook called `useTreeItem2`.

> It can be used with both `SimpleTreeView` and `RichTreeView`, and enables developers to fully leverage the TreeItem's subcomponents along with their default behaviors.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
It can be used with both `SimpleTreeView` and `RichTreeView`, and enables developers to fully leverage the Tree Item's subcomponents along with their default behaviors.
```

If we refer to the concept of Tree Item rather than the `TreeItem` component then I think we need a space

> This approach ensures customization and flexibility are at the forefront without sacrificing the component's inherent features.

Reviewer 5: I would start from the pain people have with the current approach: people have to copy-paste a lot of the Tree Item's logic to do customization, stuff like expansion and selection events. This will be more and more painful in the future as we add new features.

> When using this hook, developers can create a tailored TreeItem that aligns perfectly with their project needs while reusing key behaviors and features the component is known for.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
When using this hook, developers can create a tailored Tree Item that aligns perfectly with their project needs while reusing key behaviors and features the component is known for.
```

Same

```jsx
const CustomTreeItem = React.forwardRef(function CustomTreeItem(
  props: TreeItem2Props,
  ref: React.Ref<HTMLLIElement>,
) {
  const { id, nodeId, label, disabled, children, ...other } = props;

  const {
    getRootProps,
    getContentProps,
    getIconContainerProps,
    getLabelProps,
    getGroupTransitionProps,
    status,
  } = useTreeItem2({ id, nodeId, children, label, disabled, rootRef: ref });

>   //compose and implement your tree item as you need

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
  // Compose and implement your tree item as you need
```

  return (
    <TreeItem2Provider nodeId={nodeId}>
      <TreeItem2Root {...getRootProps(other)}>
        <TreeItemContent {...getContentProps()}>
          <TreeItem2IconContainer {...getIconContainerProps()}>
            <TreeItem2Icon status={status} />
          </TreeItem2IconContainer>
          <Box sx={{ flexGrow: 1, display: 'flex', gap: 1 }}>
              {(label as string)[0]}
            </Avatar>
            <TreeItem2Label {...getLabelProps()} />
          </Box>
        </TreeItemContent>
        {children && <TreeItem2GroupTransition {...getGroupTransitionProps()} />}
      </TreeItem2Root>
    </TreeItem2Provider>
  );
});
```

```jsx
<RichTreeView items={myDataSet} slots={{ item: CustomTreeItem }} />
```

> You can check all the details of the given example on the [RichTreeView customization page](https://mui.com/x/react-tree-view/rich-tree-view/customization/#headless-api).

Reviewer 5: Clearly a nitpick but I would add both the `SimpleTreeView` and `RichTreeView` doc page here to make extra clear that we are supporting `SimpleTreeView` (even though you said it above)

:::info

> To avoid further breaking changes with the subcomponents names, we're delivering this new customization API with a numerical prefix '2', for example, `TreeItem2` and `TreeItem2Content`.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
To avoid further breaking changes with the subcomponents names, we're delivering this new customization API with a numerical suffix '2', for example, `TreeItem2` and `TreeItem2Content`.
```

> This update ensures that any existing customizations remain unaffected, providing you with a seamless transition to adopt the latest API at your convenience.

Reviewer 5: It may be worth saying the `TreeItem` will be replaced in the next major.

```suggestion
This update ensures that any existing customizations remain unaffected, providing you with a seamless transition to adopt the latest API at your convenience.

Our plan is to replace the move the new implementation to the `TreeItem` component on the next major release and remove all those suffixes.
```

- [Pie charts click events](https://mui.com/x/react-charts/pie/#click-event)

### Built-in Grid

The Axis component now features a built-in Grid, offering users a structured layout for easier data analysis and visualization.

<img alt="Charts axis grid" src="/static/blog/mui-x-v7/axis-grid.png" width="1550" height="654" loading="lazy" />

For details on its usage and configuration, please refer to the [Grid section](https://mui.com/x/react-charts/axis/#grid) in the documentation.

### Reference line

The `ChartsReferenceLine` component enhances data visualization, providing users with a clear reference to better understand and analyze key data points.

<img alt="Charts reference line" src="/static/blog/mui-x-v7/charts-reference-line.png" width="1200" height="840" loading="lazy" />

You can find more details on its [documentation](https://mui.com/x/react-charts/axis/#reference-line).

## Date and Time Pickers

The focus has been primarily on developing the highly anticipated DateTimeRangePicker, alongside a significant effort to enhance accessibility in the fields, ensuring that our components are as inclusive and user-friendly as possible.

> ### Improved accessibility on Pickers Text Field

Reviewer 5: Unsure:

```suggestion
### Improved accessibility for the field components
```

But `PickersTextField` is the name of the new component, we did not improve it strictly speaking, we created it to improve the accessibility of the component that uses it (the field).

You can now set the `enableAccessibleFieldDOMStructure` prop to enhance the DOM structure of fields and pickers components.

This improvement addresses accessibility limitations of the traditional `<input />` element by enabling a new DOM structure that effectively manages aria attributes within multiple input sections.

> This feature greatly improves the experience for screen reader users, making interactions with date fields and pickers more intuitive and accessible.

Reviewer 5: This is not limited to dates

```suggestion
This feature greatly improves the experience for screen reader users, making interactions with fields and pickers more intuitive and accessible.
```

```jsx
<DateField enableAccessibleFieldDOMStructure />
<DatePicker enableAccessibleFieldDOMStructure />
```

For more details, please check out the [documentation section](https://mui.com/x/react-date-pickers/fields/#accessible-dom-structure).

### Support for date-fns v3

The Date and Time Pickers now support both versions of v2 and v3 of date-fns, and you can select your desired version from one of the two import lines:

> ```jsx
> // date-fns v2.x
> import { AdapterDateFns } from '@mui/x-date-pickers/AdapterDateFns';
> ```
> 
> ```jsx
> // date-fns v3.x
> import { AdapterDateFns } from '@mui/x-date-pickers/AdapterDateFnsV3';
> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```jsx
// date-fns v2.x
import { AdapterDateFns } from '@mui/x-date-pickers/AdapterDateFns';

// date-fns v3.x
import { AdapterDateFns } from '@mui/x-date-pickers/AdapterDateFnsV3';
```
```

I think we can put these on the same code block

<video preload="metadata" autoplay muted loop playsinline width="600" height="510">
  <source src="/static/blog/mui-x-v7/date-time-range-picker.mp4" type="video/mp4">
</video>

Learn how to use and customize the [new component](https://mui.com/x/react-date-pickers/date-time-range-picker/) now!

## What's next

As usual, we're committed to further improving the library by introducing new features, refining existing ones, and focusing on community feedback to shape our roadmap.

Throughout this year, we'll invest in making MUI X components **design agnostic**. The components will still ship using Material UI as the default, but we're striving to ensure that they seamlessly integrate with any design system.
The result is advanced components offering extreme flexibility and customization options, enabling a broader range of application styles without compromising the high-quality use cases and workflows that MUI X is known for.".

Additionally, the following are the deliveries we're planning for the next few months.

### Data Grid

> - [Improved Server side integration](https://mui.com/x/react-data-grid/server-side-data/)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- [Improved Server side-integration](https://mui.com/x/react-data-grid/server-side-data/)
```

- [Column management panel with support for pivoting and other features](https://github.com/mui/mui-x/issues/5700)
- [Pivoting](https://github.com/mui/mui-x/issues/214) [<span class="plan-premium"></span>](/x/introduction/licensing/#premium-plan 'Premium plan')

### Tree View

- [Inline node name editing](https://github.com/mui/mui-x/issues/10112)

> - [Checkbox selection for Simple- and RichTreeView](https://github.com/mui/mui-x/pull/11452)

Reviewer 5: How about:

```suggestion
- [Checkbox selection for all Tree View components](https://github.com/mui/mui-x/pull/11452)
```

Or simply:

```suggestion
- [Checkbox selection for `SimpleTreeView` and `RichTreeView`](https://github.com/mui/mui-x/pull/11452)
```

The `Simple-` is not super readable

Reviewer 5: For the backquote I don't have a strong opinion, as long as we are consistent throughout all the bullet points.

- [Drag and drop support for RichTreeView](https://github.com/mui/mui-x/issues/9686)[<span class="plan-pro"></span>](/x/introduction/licensing/#pro-plan 'Pro plan')

### Charts

- Improved label flexibility and customization
- [Zoom and navigation](https://github.com/mui/mui-x/issues/12503)[<span class="plan-pro"></span>](/x/introduction/licensing/#pro-plan 'Pro plan')
- [Heatmap](https://github.com/mui/mui-x/issues/7926)[<span class="plan-pro"></span>](/x/introduction/licensing/#pro-plan 'Pro plan')

### Date and Time Pickers

> - [TimeRangePicker](https://github.com/mui/mui-x/issues/4460)[<span class="plan-pro"></span>](/x/introduction/licensing/#pro-plan 'Pro plan')

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Time Range Picker](https://github.com/mui/mui-x/issues/4460)[<span class="plan-pro"></span>](/x/introduction/licensing/#pro-plan 'Pro plan')
```

> - [TimeRangePicker](https://github.com/mui/mui-x/issues/4460)[<span class="plan-pro"></span>](/x/introduction/licensing/#pro-plan 'Pro plan')

Reviewer 5: Could it be a good opportunity to help build some momentum for PigmentCSS by listing it as a goal for all components?

For a complete overview, please visit the [MUI X roadmap](https://github.com/mui/mui-x/projects/1).

## Long-Term Support

We roll bug fixes, performance enhancements, and other improvements into new releases, so as we introduce MUI X v7, MUI X v6 now is officially in [Long-Term Support (LTS)](https://mui.com/x/introduction/support/#long-term-support-lts). This means only critical bug fixes and security updates will be patched to MUI X v6.

> Support for MUI X v5 is officially **discontinued**, and we encourage users to migrate to v6 and then to v7 to benefit from enhanced features, performance improvements, and ongoing support.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Support for MUI X v5 is officially **discontinued**, and we encourage you to migrate to v6 and then to v7 to benefit from enhanced features, performance improvements, and ongoing support.
```

Refer to the reader

## Migration guide

We fully understand that updating a dependency library can sometimes be daunting.
To smooth the transition to the new version, we have documented all breaking changes in our migration guides:

- [Data Grid](https://mui.com/x/migration/migration-data-grid-v6/)
- [Date and Time Pickers](https://mui.com/x/migration/migration-pickers-v6/)
- [Charts](https://mui.com/x/migration/migration-charts-v6/)
- [Tree View](https://mui.com/x/migration/migration-tree-view-v6/)

These component-specific guides are reference pages designed to assist you if you encounter any challenges while updating to the new major version.
It's our way of making the upgrade process more manageable and less burdensome for you.
However, should you need further assistance, please don't hesitate to contact us and send your feedback.

## How to get involved

Your feedback played a crucial role in shaping MUI X, and we always appreciate hearing from you.
To continue enhancing our product, we invite you to share your pain points and challenges with us by:

> - [Giving us a user interview](https://forms.gle/vsBv6CLPz9h57xg8A).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Talking to us on a call](https://forms.gle/vsBv6CLPz9h57xg8A).
```

I think "Giving us a user interview" is a bit of a weird saying. Like, "to give a user interview" is just to "talk to the makers and give feedback". I'd probably go for something along these lines.

  </a>
</div>

After a few months in pre-release, we're thrilled to announce the stable release of [MUI X v7](https://github.com/mui/mui-x/releases/tag/v7.0.0), packed with new components, exciting features, improved usability, and developer experience.

## Table of contents

- [Data Grid](#data-grid)
  - [Column resizing on the Community plan](#column-resizing-on-the-community-plan)
  - [Sticky headers and improved scrolling performance](#sticky-headers-and-improved-scrolling-performance)
  - [Improved columns panel design](#improved-columns-panel-design)
  - [Date Object support in filter model](#date-object-support-in-filter-model)
  - [Smaller bundle size](#smaller-bundle-size)
  - [New stable features](#new-stable-features)
- [Tree View](#tree-view)
  - [Rich Tree View](#rich-tree-view)
  - [New customization hook: `useTreeItem2`](#new-customization-hook-usetreeitem2)
- [Charts](#charts)
  - [Gauge charts](#gauge-charts)
  - [Click event handler](#click-event-handler)
  - [Built-in Grid](#built-in-grid)
  - [Reference Line](#reference-line)
- [Date and Time Pickers](#date-and-time-pickers)

>   - [Improved accessibility on Pickers Text field](#improved-accessibility-on-pickers-text-field)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  - [Improved accessibility for the field components](#improved-accessibility-for-the-field-components)
```

  - [Support for date-fns v3](#support-for-date-fns-v3)
  - [Date Time Range Picker](#date-time-range-picker)[<span class="plan-pro"></span>](/x/introduction/licensing/#pro-plan 'Pro plan')
- [What's next](#whats-next)
- [Long-term support](#long-term-support)
- [Migration guide](#migration-guide)
- [How to get involved](#how-to-get-involved)

## Data Grid

### Column resizing on the Community plan

> As MUI X commercial offerings continue to expand, we're pleased to enhance the community plan by integrating features previously exclusive to commercial users.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
As MUI X commercial offerings continue to expand, we're pleased to enhance the [Community plan](/pricing/) by integrating features previously exclusive to commercial users.
```

We can't assume every reader is familiar with our pricing model 🙂

[Column resizing](https://mui.com/x/react-data-grid/column-dimensions/#resizing) and [auto-sizing](https://mui.com/x/react-data-grid/column-dimensions/#autosizing), which were once Pro features, are now available to all users at no cost.
This transition reflects our commitment to providing an exceptional user experience across the board, and aims to make the free components stand out more in the open-source space.

### Sticky headers and improved scrolling performance

The Data Grid now offers a more responsive experience with smoother scrolling and enhanced screen reader support, thanks to a refactor of column headers and pinning implementations.

> On its first announcement, we showcased some of these improvements, but during the beta phase, we have further polished the scrolling performance for an even more significantly improved user experience.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
On its first announcement, some of these improvements were showcased, but during the beta phase, the scrolling performance was further polished for an even better user experience.
```

<figure style="padding:0; margin:0">
  <video preload="metadata" autoplay muted loop playsinline width="690" height="417" controls>
    <source src="/static/blog/mui-x-v7/sticky-headers-and-vertical-scrolling.mp4" type="video/mp4">
  </video>
  <figcaption style="color: #888; font-size: 0.9em; text-align: center;">A before and after showcase, first with horizontal and then with vertical scrolling.</figcaption>
</figure>

:::warning

> The scrolling experience is far better, but the solution has a downside: **column headers can no longer be transparent** because content scrolls behind them.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
The scrolling experience is far better, but the solution has a downside: ** the column headers can no longer be transparent** because content scrolls behind them.
```

If you're using Material UI's theming system, the Data Grid will adapt to your application seamlessly.

Without it, you may need to manually set an appropriate background color to maintain your design.
:::

### Improved columns panel design

As part of an overarching project aimed at enhancing usability in managing columns within the Data Grid, we've redesigned the column visibility panel, introducing a more streamlined, checkbox-based interface to replace the previous toggle switch design.

> The goal is to further develop this panel by incorporating additional column management functions, such as column reordering and pinning. Additionally, We've extracted the internal component to ease the introduction of the upcoming pivoting UI.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
The goal is to further enhance this panel by incorporating additional column management functions, such as column reordering and pinning. Additionally, the internal component has been extracted to ease the introduction of the upcoming pivoting UI.
```

The `filterModel` now supports `Date` objects for `date` and `dateTime` column types, providing a more intuitive and efficient filtering experience.

While string values remain compatible for these types, any updates to the `filterModel` made through the UI (such as via the filter panel) will automatically use `Date` objects, ensuring consistency and ease of data handling.

### Smaller bundle size

Introducing a separate entry point for locales has significantly reduced the bundle size of the barrel index when tree-shaking isn't operational (for example, Webpack in dev mode).

As a reference, with the `@mui/x-data-grid` npm package, this change led to a reduction of approximately 19% – shrinking the bundle size from [114.2kB](https://bundlephobia.com/package/@mui/x-data-grid@6.19.2) to [92.9kB](https://bundlephobia.com/package/@mui/x-data-grid@7.0.0).

<figure style="padding:0; margin:0">
  <img width="600" alt="A chart showcasing the bundle size change" src="/static/blog/mui-x-v7/new-bundle-size.png" >
  <figcaption style="color: #888; font-size: 0.9em; text-align: center;">A chart showcasing the Data Grid's bundle size change.</figcaption>
</figure>

### New stable features

> To ensure that new features can be introduced throughout the lifecycle of a major stable version without waiting for pre-releases, MUI X releases them marked as `experimentalFeatures` or with the `unstable_` prefix.

Reviewer 6: Optional improvement: Although it's quoted in the subsequent warning too, but just to emphasize a bit more. Feel free to discard the suggestion.
```suggestion
To ensure that new features can be introduced throughout the lifecycle of a major stable version or any changes could be made to them after they are released without waiting for the product pre-releases, MUI X releases them marked as `experimentalFeatures` or with the `unstable_` prefix.
```

---
title: Introducing MUI X v7.0.0
description: Check out all the newest additions to the next major of the advanced components.
date: 2024-03-25T08:00:00.000Z
authors: ['josefreitas']
tags: ['MUI X', 'Product']
card: true
---

<div style="max-width: 692px; width: 100%; height: 230px; overflow: hidden; margin-bottom: 16px;">
  <a href="https://github.com/mui/mui-x/releases/tag/v7.0.0">
    <img src="/static/blog/mui-x-v7/intro.jpg" alt="MUI X v7 - major stable release" width="1200" height="400" style="width: 100%; height: 100%; object-fit: cover; object-position: center;" />
  </a>
</div>

After a few months in pre-release, we're thrilled to announce the stable release of [MUI X v7](https://github.com/mui/mui-x/releases/tag/v7.0.0), packed with new components, exciting features, improved usability, and developer experience.

## Table of contents

- [Data Grid](#data-grid)

>   - [Column resizing on community plan](#column-resizing-on-community-plan)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  - [Column resizing on the Community plan](#column-resizing-on-the-community-plan)
```

  - [Sticky headers and improved scrolling performance](#sticky-headers-and-improved-scrolling-performance)
  - [Improved columns panel design](#improved-columns-panel-design)
  - [Date Object support in filter model](#date-object-support-in-filter-model)
  - [Smaller bundle size](#smaller-bundle-size)
  - [New stable features](#new-stable-features)
- [Tree View](#tree-view)
  - [Rich Tree View](#rich-tree-view)
  - [New customization hook: `useTreeItem2`](#new-customization-hook-usetreeitem2)
- [Charts](#charts)
  - [Gauge charts](#gauge-charts)
  - [Click event handler](#click-event-handler)
  - [Built-in Grid](#built-in-grid)
  - [Reference Line](#reference-line)
- [Date and Time Pickers](#date-and-time-pickers)
  - [Improved accessibility on Pickers Text field](#improved-accessibility-on-pickers-text-field)
  - [Support for date-fns v3](#support-for-date-fns-v3)
  - [Date Time Range Picker](#date-time-range-picker)[<span class="plan-pro"></span>](/x/introduction/licensing/#pro-plan 'Pro plan')
- [What's next](#whats-next)
- [Long-term support](#long-term-support)
- [Migration guide](#migration-guide)
- [How to get involved](#how-to-get-involved)

## Data Grid

> ### Column resizing on the community plan

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Column resizing on the Community plan
```

This intuitive picker simplifies the process of selecting date and time ranges, making it ideal for applications that require detailed scheduling or period selection.

<figure style="padding:0; margin:0; margin-bottom:20px">
  <video preload="metadata" autoplay muted loop playsinline width="600" height="510">
    <source src="/static/blog/mui-x-v7/date-time-range-picker.mp4" type="video/mp4">
  </video>
  <figcaption style="color: #888; font-size: 0.9em; text-align: center;">A video showcasing a date and time range selection.</figcaption>
</figure>

Learn how to use and customize the [new component](https://mui.com/x/react-date-pickers/date-time-range-picker/) now!

## What's next

As usual, we're committed to further improving the library by introducing new features, refining existing ones, and focusing on community feedback to shape our roadmap.

Throughout this year, we'll invest in making MUI X components **design agnostic**. The components will still ship using Material UI as the default, but we're striving to ensure that they seamlessly integrate with any design system.

> The result is advanced components offering extreme flexibility and customization options, enabling a broader range of application styles without compromising the high-quality use cases and workflows that MUI X is known for.".

Author: Thanks, @LukasTy! I've incorporated your suggestions on the followup:
https://github.com/mui/material-ui/pull/41601
